You are listening to radio lab radio from
W. N. Y. S. E. N. N. P. R. N. I assume we're live on the air now.
We don't do live either. If you guys ever talked to each other.
I don't think so. No. Oh this. So this is Caribou, right? Well Hi,
this is Jim Glick. Hey, how are you? Fine. How are you? Pretty good.
Good rainbows,
rainbows, rainbows. Okay, so we're going to start today with author James Glick.
As I recall you wanting to talk about Isaac Newton. That's right.
We did call him and talk about Isaac Newton, but more specifically colors.
Alright. Isaac Newton. He's 23 years old, 1665 and he's,
he's home for the holidays. No, there's no holiday. He's home for the play.
There was actually a plague. They sent everybody home from school. In any case,
he's in his room famously solving all these mysteries of the world.
And one of the questions that he thinks about during this break is what are
colors? Where do they come from?
Like when I see the color red, is that red?
Is it inside my head or is it something that exists sort of out there in the
world? Yes. The light without or is the light within? Hm.
So he pokes a knife into his eye. He w what do you mean?
Here's what Newton wrote in his notebook. I took a Botkin,
put it betwixt my eye on the bone,
this near to the backside of my eye as I could and pressing my eye with the end
of it.
Whoa. Whoa.
It appeared several white dark colored circle.
Did that lead him to some conclusion about where the spots live,
whether they're outside or inside? No,
just didn't get them very far cause seeing spots when you poke your eye doesn't
tell you much about what color is. But um, what he did next did,
and this one needs a little more famous for, he got himself a prison,
which is just a bit of glass shaped like a pyramid.
It wasn't so easy for him to get his hands on a prism, but he did.
Then he shot his blind. So the room was totally dark,
but he poked a little hole in one of the blinds and then he waited and the son
had to be at just the right angle
and he waited.
And when the sun got to just the right spot,
a ray of light shot through the room.
Newton immediately stuck his prison into the light and the light shattered
[inaudible]
and became a rainbow on the wall
or in Newton zone. Words colored image of the Sun.
Oh, that's gorgeous. Isn't it? A colored image of the sun.
That's Victoria Findlay's. She wrote a book about color and she says,
the thing to understand about this experiment is it at the time people believed
that white light was given by gold or given given by this amazing thing called
nature. The light from the sun was sort of holy. Yeah.
If there was anything that was pure, it was white.
So when the prism did the rainbow thing, which people knew prisons did,
they just figured the colors are in there and the glass. In other words,
that rainbow had nothing to do with the light itself. That was just the prison.
Adding some kind of impurities to the light. Oh Wow.
I haven't thought of the possibility that the prison is muddying.
The light is polluting the light.
How do you know that the prism isn't generating these colors? Yeah,
so he got a second prism, and this was the trick.
While the first prison was still making that rainbow on the wall,
he moved a few feet away and he held up a second prison in the blue area to see
what would happen to the blue light with the prison,
add more colors to the blue light or would it be transformed in some other way?
And what he found was nothing happens.
It remains blue.
So he thought if the blue light isn't getting muddied by the prison and maybe
the prison wasn't muddying the white light to begin with,
maybe that rainbow of colors was actually coming from inside the white light.
He inferred that the first prison is dividing light into its constituent parts,
which means that the white light we see around us is actually constituted all of
these colors. The colors were in the light. They are the light.
He had his answer. Light is a physical thing in the physical world.
You can tweak it, tested, study it.
This was the beginning of everything we know about light today.
Newton put us on the road toward finding that ultraviolet rays, x-rays,
radio waves,
they're all different energies of light and colors are just energies within that
little sliver that we can see.
And that has led to our understanding of the greenhouse effect,
knowing what stars are made of, even the age of our own universe.
Uh,
not everybody was pleased by this. A little bit later. John Keats,
the romantic poet, was really crossed with him and in a,
in a poem because they said he reduced,
removed all the poetry of the rainbow and the real challenge to Newton's view of
color. One that would really stick oddly enough, it did come from a poet,
not Keith's, but at the poet named Gerta. Yeah.
Here's this German romantic poet, um,
that is authored Joanel air regularly with us who writes about this kind of
thing and always wonderfully.
One day he is walking in the park and he spots these yellow crocuses and he
looks at the Yellow Crocus, isn't it Myers? Their pedals, it's, you know,
it's early spring and they're blooming.
And then it quickly turns away and in an instant he suddenly sees his dash a
violet crosses eyes. He still sees the shape of the flower,
but now it's violent. It's the opposite of yellow.
He hadn't rubbed his eye and stuck the needle in it. And yet there it was,
seemed just as real, as real as the yellow coat. But he knew it wasn't real.
It came from inside his mind and it was, you know something, you know,
we've all hallucinated colors.
You can press on your eyeballs or close your eyes and you see this riot of
fireworks. But for Gerta,
that simple observation leads him to think that may be color isn't simply about
the external universe. And maybe our perception of colors began in the world,
but maybe it was finished inside the mind.
And today [inaudible] [inaudible] a few years later,
this is still an open question.
A scientist can say color has an objective reality,
but the colors we see are tricks of the imagination.
[inaudible]
and there is no perfectly objective pew of color. I personally,
I like to keep both of those opinions in mind at the same time.
[inaudible]
me too. Me Three
well lucky for us.
We're going to do a whole show of this. You don't say I'm Jed. I've been run.
I'm Robert Krulwich. This is Radiolab and today it's all about color. Yes,
we're is color. Is it in, is it out? That's the question. Yeah.
We're going to explore that question through the eyes of a butterfly in the
killing fields of Cambodia with a woman who may seek colors.
The rest of us can only dream of and will go back to a time when the sea
apparently looked like dark red wine.
[inaudible]
stick us in your ear holes cause we're about to get colorful.
[inaudible].
And by the way, just before we get rolling,
just want to say we did something kind of different for us while making this
hour, we put out this call to a bunch of musicians,
solo artist bands to send us their favorite color songs,
their own interpretations of their favorite colors.
[inaudible] you got it.
An amazing response.
So throughout this hour you're going to hear color songs of various kinds, uh,
woven into some of the pieces between the pieces, those songs. By the way,
we have plans for, yeah, big plans. You can go to our website,
radiolab.org to get a full list of the songs. I hadn't. Thank you. By the way.
Everybody who sent us the Sunday.
Absolutely.
Okay. So, uh, should we go? Yes. Let's ask. So to, to get things going. Um,
hey, he's here. You're here. He is.
Not long after we talked to Jim Glick about Sir Isaac Newton,
we cannot do a neuroscientist by the name of Mark Cengiz.
I'm going to two grapes, if that's all right with, you know,
who had written a book about color. Would you like some grapes? I know thing.
And we threw the question at him.
So one of the sort of debates that became interesting to us is this,
where is the color? Is it out there? I mean,
is this great that I'm holding right now?
Is it red for everything that'd be a whale? I mean, is this,
does it exist in a way that you can pin down and say it's outside me or does it
only get to be red when it gets in my head? Well,
you can another way, a more severe way to, to ask this,
and I asked this whenever I'm giving talks,
is just would aliens see it as red or would would aliens seed as red? Right?
And, and the answer is almost surely truth is says mark,
even your dog wouldn't see it as red. Oh, your dog has color. Vision has blue,
yellow and black. White. Really? Yes.
So what would the world look like to a dog? I mean,
if you've ever known a guy who's color blind to, and 10% of men are color blind,
that's roughly what it's like. Huh? Well, here's a question.
If a dog and the human [inaudible]
and a crow, which could be staring at a rainbow,
would they be seeing very different things? Yes.
Now this question that Robert just kinda tossed out during an interview,
like about how different creatures would see the rainbow.
This ended up taking us down a little worm hole and we ended up actually getting
a choir to help us illustrate, uh, what we learned.
But just to set a baseline, your normal rainbow goes like this,
starting bottom up. Three, two, one.
[inaudible]
red, orange, yellow, green, blue, violet, Roy g bit. Where'd you bev? Yeah,
though I don't know why people put the I in there, but that's it.
If you didn't have the indigo, you couldn't say it though. Be [inaudible].
That's why you need the, I think just to say the ROYGBIV,
you know that by the way is Tom Cronin. Oh, I bought,
it's called a visual ecologist. Mark suggested we give him a call.
He told us that humans seat seven colors in the rainbow,
in the, in the case of the dog, very different rainbow, uh,
it's gonna start off blue. He'll be able to see blue just fine.
So what was he a rainbow starting with blue.
Same blue we see and then grading off into [inaudible]
green [inaudible] same green as us and then disappearing.
He would end there
with a tiny bit of yellow thrown in. That's it. Yeah.
So the rainbow be only be about half as thick as ours. Wow.
It's a sucky rainbow dog. Yeah.
That's why when God promised that he would never deliver another day lose,
he gave a paper. I made the promise in the rainbow.
The dogs just for totally unimpressed.
And what is it about the dog I that makes it see this way it doesn't have red
sensitive photo receptors. No red sensitive cones.
The weird thing is that the difference between dogs and us cone wise is just
one. They have cones tuned to blue and green. So do we.
But we have this one extra red, which doesn't really seem like a big difference.
I mean it's just one cone, but I have three.
It's so much better than two. That's j knights vision scientist.
Because of this kind of multiplicative thing.
Red Can get mixed with blue chinks, purple
or red can get mixed with yellow to make orange and green to match with Blue
Teal or turquoise.
That's how we get about a hundred different shades of color that we can see.
So by adding one photo pigment, instead of adding just one more color,
you actually add about 98 colors or so. All right, let's move on.
So now we have a CHRO. Unless you'd like to change the bird.
Well the cro is not so interesting cause it's pretty much like us.
So let's take a look. Psycho off something like a um, a sparrow, right?
Cause sparrows have ultraviolet vision. What do they see?
So they see the rainbow starts before our rainbow starts where we used to see
sky, it would see an ultraviolet color,
then it would see the wild greens
and the oranges.
And then the red and probably would see further into the red has because they
have a more red sensitive red receptor than we have.
So we see a much broader rainbow. Let's start earlier and it would end later.
Woo.
So should we assume that we've now that this bow is the champion,
that that's the, that's, that's as high as it gets.
If you're talking about Virta, Brits,
[inaudible] thing that has a heart and the mind and a,
once you leave the vertebrates, then all bets are off.
You've got many animals have much better color vision than the vertebrates.
Like what butterflies are a great example.
Butterflies have five or six kinds of rays of color receptors.
We only have three. Remember butterflies see more colors than we do.
Yeah. So if a butterfly, we're looking at a rainbow
here. Well they do, I'm sure.
I mean butterflies are out there and when the game was wrapped, but it was,
he colors,
we have no names for between the blues and the Greens and the Greens and the
yellows. Woo. So it would go from ultraviolet. It would,
yep.
And it would see violet and then blue and then blue,
blue, green, Yup. And Green, green, blue, blue e or whatever.
Right. And then orange and red and all that.
Yup.
Very complicated eyes, Huh. Okay. So just to recap, all right, here's the dog.
[inaudible]
here's US human
[inaudible].
Now the sparrow, more based, little bit more high end,
so to speak. And finally the butterfly
[inaudible] which
is, you know, not so far above the sparrow, but it's got more mids in there.
So I'm now thinking butterfly butterflies get the crown. Yeah, but then you,
if you go under coral reefs,
you come across these animals called mantis shrimps. What are they called?
Metta. Like Mantis, like a praying mantis. Oh, mantis shrimp.
The trim catches pray using an arm, like a praying. Medis says, Oh, oh,
I've managed shrimps. Or are mostly pretty small about the size of a finger.
Some get to be as big as your forearm break. Big Animals.
I'm actually looking this up right here. Oh. Oh my God.
They're so colorful. No, they are colorful though. You're here. Look at this.
Oh my God. They're just like a,
it's like they're electric colored like turquoise or something.
Iridescent in their eyes are like little cartoon eyes. They're gigantic. Yeah,
they have two really big eyes right on the front.
And you said that dogs have two cones. We have three.
How much does the butterfly have? Again, butterfly has five,
depends on the butterfly. A managed have 16
1616 kinds of receptors. What would the rainbow look like to them mean?
Could they even see it matter? Sure,
but see the rainbow fine cause they live in very shallow water and so the water
is pretty clear. Almost like air. They would start the rainbow way, way,
way inside. Where we see violet, they would see
then they would go on through several kinds of ultraviolet,
probably five or six kinds of ultraviolet and then we get to violet which,
which is another reaching our colors and go through violet and violet blue and
blue and blue green
where they have those green, green, blue, blue blues as well.
[inaudible] and then they would go out into the rent. So they would be about it.
But that has red as us when they got to the red. But only in the red. Yeah.
What a rainbow that must be. Yeah.
They have the most complicated visual system of any animals by a factor of two
or more. Wait, wait, maybe he said any,
do you mean you mean did you mean that unequivocally? Any, yeah.
No other animal that we know of has a visual system within 50% as complicated.
All right. Mantis
[inaudible].
Okay. You know, on the other hand, their brains are tiny,
so who knows what and too they may not have the ability to perceive the beauty
of the rainbow in the way. No, I don't. I don't know. They're there.
Venice from surf into violence and how they will be interviewed.
They go around and kill things. That's, I mean really that's what they do.
That's, that's one reason there is so fascinating is how,
how would they have to go around and kill things? What are the shells? Crabs,
other managed shrimps. Shrimps. Octopuses. They'll kill octopuses. Yeah.
Small ones. A good size.
Managed shrimp will can break the wall of an aquarium where really? Yeah,
there's a,
there's ones in California that can break aquarium walls if they hit it hard.
Oh my gosh. So you have a pug dishes.
Mohammed Elise seagoing animal with incredibly great visual sense.
[inaudible]
special thanks to Jim Briggs, our engineer. For the acquire session,
which was a blast to mark Shank Geasey for setting us off in this direction to
Michael Kirschner and the young New Yorkers Chorus and John McClay and
the Grease Church Curl Society and those folks from the collegiate corral them
Odessa choirs who joined us and to Alex Ambrosio WQXR for getting everybody
together. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
[inaudible].
Okay. A very quick
update since we aired this broadcast,
the mystery of the Mantis shrimp,
I has just gotten deeper. As we mentioned,
they don't seem to gaze at sunsets or rainbows.
We now think that maybe they use colors as kind of triggers for particular
actions. One color says fight and other color. They eat other colors as sex.
They'd still have the best eyes in the world,
but what they're doing with those eyes is a bigger mystery now than ever.